David, have you got it ready? There has been a couple of others, but I think they're out of print.
Okay, he's got the tape back on. I've only have just a few more minutes of material, if you don't mind.
Alright. The series that you have been working on... It looks to me from the dates, for
about 25 years. The, Viagins Interplanetarias? Viagins.
That's how you say it. is in Portuguese. Viagins Interplanetarias. Okay.
But I'm not about to try to give you a lesson in Portuguese. I've been
struggling with that damn language myself for a couple of years and not getting
very far. Well, one of my first questions on that was that when you start, I
guess the start of that was some short stories that were published in the
Continent Makers back in the early 50s, I think. And the first novel was Queen
of Zamba. The first story of that series, I believe,
and then I wrote several short stories also in that setting. When you started it
back then, did you intend for that to be a future history? Not really, no. I
just sort of started it, well, let's say that this way. When I was a pimpled
adolescent or a high school student, I loved Edgar Rice Burroughs' Tales of Mars
and Venus and devoured them as they came out. Many years later, when one of my
boys got to the age where it was right to read aloud to him, I started reading A
Princess of Mars. and every so often I that. Well,
I thought, wouldn't it be fun to do John Carter over in modern dress, you might
say. In other words, write a story which, from its basic assumptions, requires a
good deal of sword play and things of that sort, lighthearted adventure, on an
exotic planet, but be strictly logical about it. In other words, in Burroughs' Mars,
they have radium rifles that can shoot 50 miles by radar sites, and still they
fool around with swords and spears, which no real people would do. So on my
planet, they also have swords and spears, and they would like to get guns, but
they're not allowed to. and the various reasons are all duly set forth and of
course they try to get around the prohibition and sometimes succeed so i went
ahead and wrote the story on that general assumption and likewise i don't have
earthmen interbreeding with christians because their chromosomes wouldn't match
in fact that's what the plot of the hostages deer turns on that the local
dictator gets his hands on this guided tour guide, Fergus Reed, and marries him
off to his sister at Sword's Point because he knows that then the sister will
never bear an heir, you see, who might threaten his power.
Okay, have any of your readers or publishers ever inquired as to if you have an
overall plan or, pardon me, a direction for this, you know, like a, a timeline
or anything like that for that series? Oh, well, as the stories have been
written, I've kept a rough chronology as to who was where and hence and when, so
let's try to keep it consistent. Well, by the way, I never finished telling you,
you asked about what sort of person I found Robert Howard to be in my
investigations. Well, everybody knows that Conan is an idealization of Howard.
In other words, the kind of person that Howard thought he would have liked to
have been the ruthless, domineering, footloose, irresponsible adventurer.
Actually, Robert, and with no respecter of laws and regulations, actually Robert
was just the opposite type, except for hot tempers and chivalrous attitude
toward women They had nothing in common. Roberts, Howard, was shy, bookish,
compassionate, extremely polite,
and socially timid, and he's so law-abiding that he wouldn't cut across the
neighbor's lot even, although everybody else across the line did. He was just
about as different from the character Conan in the stories as a person could be.
But he still was an idealization, or Conan may have been. Yes, kind of. Well,
Robert was always talking a lot about how he wished that he thought he'd have
been really in his element if he'd been born on the Texan frontier in the 19th
century or in some barbarian society like the ancient Gauls or Goths or
somebody. well i don't i think he'd have had a very unpleasant surprise because
it wasn't it wasn't his temperament at all he was a he was a shy bookish
introvert do you think he would have gotten married had he lived or would he
have been a bachelor forever uh would he have gotten married if what if he had
lived long if he had lived That is impossible to say. He had an outsized monkey
on his back, and he was doomed from some way back. He planned his suicide ever
since he was a little boy. Yeah. He told his mother when he was a little kiddie
that, Mama, when you die, I want to die with you. And the foolish woman, I
think, probably sort of giggled and encouraged him. Oh, I hadn't realized that.
I thought it was a spur of the moment thing. No, no, no. It was long planned.
And several people knew about it. But they didn't do anything. The only thing
you could have done with Robert was if you'd gotten him to a good shrink early
enough, quite a good many years before he actually killed himself, why,
something might have been done. But that, of course, is uncertain. Can't even
tell. Excuse me. I just had one more question on that series just to finish that
off my impression of that series was that that's probably your closest body of
work to pure science fiction in that you don't when they travel on spaceships
for instance you observe the laws of relativity I just I think most of the
planets and the stars involved are fairly near ones and so forth I wouldn't be
wrong in calling that science fiction as opposed to science fiction. There are
no supernatural elements in it. Right. Okay. All right. Just to change it
entirely here to sort of wind down, your writing goes back to, I guess, to,
what, 38, 37, which predates even people like Asimov or Heinlein or Van Boat and
so forth. I start at just about the same time, but he's passed 200 books, and I
only had 93 out, so I'm afraid I shall never catch up. I wouldn't be surprised
if you were in second place. Oh, no. There are several people ahead of me like
Del Rey and Silverberg. Silverberg has more books than you? Yes, I think he has
well over a hundred. Hmm, let me know. A lot of them are juveniles, so you don't
hear about them much. Well, I was going to ask what it was like to write or to
help form, in fact, to form the so-called Golden Age of Science Fiction back in
the late 30s and through the 40s and so forth. Well, the trouble with Golden
Ages is that you never realized you had one until it's over. Right. It was just
a bunch of young folks trying to make a living. Okay. So you know, would you
have no sense of a fellowship or a special era of... Yes, there was a great deal
of camaraderie. There was a group of about a dozen of the writers and editors
who used to get together in New York about once a month. It included John
Campbell, Jack Williamson, Henry Kuttner, Edmund Hamilton. and Otis Klein. Let me
see. Oh, I can have Frank long, and I dare say I could think of the names of a
few others. And we'd get together and have an evening and talk and talk and talk
and end up with usually ice cream and cake. We were a comparatively sober lot.
In other words, there was no sense that you, the kinds of writing you were doing
the editors you were working with and so forth, that you were sort of
restructuring or re-pointing the direction of science fiction? Anything special
in that area? Oh, I don't know. I dare say that various ones of us did have
their dreams and fancies at times and wondered how it was all going to come out
and would this become, would the genre expand and take over the mainstream and
various things of that, was of that sort. But as to that, mostly it was, as I
said, it was simply a matter of making a living. How much influence would you
say that Campbell had on you? On me, very great. I learned a great deal of what
I think I know about storytelling from him. The three main influences on me were
Campbell and Pratt and the 1941 session at the Bread Bluff Writers' Conference.
Yes, I did read that. In relation to Campbell for just a moment, was the
influence to such an extent that he would send a story back to you and say,
rewrite it or do this to it? Yes, yes, he could do that. One thing that did not
occur between us was his proposing story ideas and having me write them because
I've never been very good at turning other people's ideas into into effective
stories. So he may have tried it a few times, but when nothing came of it why,
he, I guess he quit. I can't think of one story that he proposed and I wrote the
story but then he rejected it. I finally sold it to one of his competitors. That
was the ghosts of Melvin Pie. He suggested a ghost story in which the dead man
had had a split personality, so he had two ghosts. Yes, I read that one. I
remember that story. You mentioned the Bread Loaf Writers Conference. What was
special about that? Who were the people involved there? At that time, they had a
lot of very good people there who really gave you the lowdown on the nuts and
bolts of writing and on the commercial and legal aspect. Not only Fletcher
Pratt, but also Bernard DeVoto and William Sloan and several others of that
caliber.
Going back to something you said right at the beginning of the interview, you
were not really raised as a science fiction fan. You weren't one of the regular
readers of the pulps and so forth, were you? I was an intermittent reader, let's
say. I'd been reading it off and on ever since boyhood, but I was never a really
heavy, faithful reader in the sense of buying every issue of every magazine. One
thing that's always fascinating to me about science fiction, the reason I
mentioned the fans, is the interaction between fans and authors. Have you had
much of a, you know, I don't mean fan mail so much, but have you been
influenced, have fans asked for things that you've tried to give them? What kind
of relationship do you have with your readers? Well, for the most part, it's
been very pleasant, except for some of the more enthusiastic admirers of H.P.
Lovecraft who talked over the jolly idea of hitting me in the face with a cherry
pie at the first fantasy convention in Providence. But the volunteer pie thrower
got cold feet, fortunately, so he didn't have that problem. But you've never...
Aside from one or two things like that, it's been very pleasant. And I do try to
answer all the letters I get, except, of course, for those that are either
abusive or by persons of unsound mind or that don't include a return address.
And that happens too sometimes. And I don't write long letters in reply. Usually
it's a postcard. hard but i don't want to fall into H.P. Lovecraft's trap he
thought he had to write a long erudite answer in wrong hand to every letter that
he got and he had to do it within 48 hours the result was his correspondence
built up and up until he was spending most of his waking hours just writing
letters that's one of the reasons he was so poor all his life has anybody made
an effort to collect all those letters and put them together in a volume oh yes
they've been published in five volumes by Arkham house okay they are now they
they are available i think maybe the first two or three are out of print i'm not
sure but you can always write salt city and ask and those are of course only a
selection because he is believed to have written something like a hundred
thousand letters in the course of his life and several thousand of those still
survive and are available either at Brown University or in the archives of
Arkham House in Salk City I read over 2,000 of the things in doing my biography
of Lovecraft and his scribbly long hand got more and more illegible as he got
older
okay I just have a couple more from your vantage point having written science
fiction science fantasy for such a long period of time as you look around now at
the field and compare it to what it was say back in the 30s what impresses you
most is it changed that much and what would the changes be qualitatively I
shouldn't say that it has changed very much it is a much bigger field of course
and the number of authors is very much larger although the number of magazines
is still about what it was in let us say the middle 1930s only about five or six
at any one time there had been a couple of booms when the word got around among
the publishers that there's golden in our hills and then everybody jumped in and
pretty soon there There would be 20 or 30 magazines, but the market was never
big enough to support that. However, while the readership has expanded greatly,
most of it, you see, takes the form of reading paperback novels and paperback
collections of short stories, not magazines. That's been the big change since
the Second World War. You know, there were no such things as American paperbacks
between the two world wars.
Sort of a follow up to that, we've spoken with some authors, particularly Norman
Spinrad, that seem to feel science fictions, the separation of science fiction
and fantasy, say from so called mainstream literature is artificial. It's done
by the publishing industry that it really should be part of the mainstream. Have
you any thoughts on that? Do you think it deserves its special category or that
it should become part of our normal literary currents? Well, you have to
remember that at one time, imaginative fiction, that is science fiction and
fantasy, was the mainstream. Prior to, I think it was about the year 1719, when
Defoe published Robinson Crusoe, there was practically speaking no such thing as
realistic fiction one or two scattered exceptions but like the first one of don
quixote but uh by and large practically all fiction had elements that we should
recognize today as science fiction or fantasy that is to say ghosts and miracles
and marvelous gadgets of one kind or another, while the Odyssey is a science
fiction and fantasy saga right there with the witch of Circe turning people
into pigs and the monsters Scylla and Charybdis eating ships and so on. In other
words... Then in the early 18th century, realistic fiction came in, you see, and
became popular and has grown and grown until it came to be called in the 20th
century the mainstream fiction. But imaginative fiction has kept right perking
along alongside it and is still there. Okay. As for the classifications,
remember that things in the real world exist by themselves, but the
classifications of them are human inventions. They are artifacts which men make
for their own convenience. and some of them make better sense than others or are
more useful than others. But they are not part of the laws of nature.
Okay. This may be not a question that you would care to answer, but it's one
that I cannot help asking an author. Do you have any works as you look back that
you're particularly proud of, or that are your particular favorites? You know,
that kind of question. Well, there are several. But it depends upon, proud of in
what way, or remember fondly in what way. I think probably my work that has
accomplished the most was the ancient engineers. and as for what stories i i
remember with the greatest pleasure well it is a general rule i'd like best the
story i just finished whatever that is but of course not everybody agrees with
that uh for example as darkness fall has become a what they call a classic that
has it's been out in and out of print steadily now for 40 years, and I believe
is currently available in paperback. So I must have done something right. But on
the other hand, when I read it nowadays, I'm aware of many places. There are
many things in it that I do differently today. Poor sentence structure and
things of that sort.
Okay. Okay, you mentioned this just a moment ago, but let me just ask you for my
last question one more time. Could you sort of summarize what, what you're
working on now and what, maybe plans you have for books that would be coming up
soon? The Howard biography, which is in collaboration with my wife. We had a
third collaborator, Dr. Jane Griffin, who was a native of Eastland, Texas who
knew the Howard Ayers and was familiar with that territory she was a
psychologist and was very much interested in the psychological aspects of Robert
Howard's life but she died last a year ago and so Catherine and I have been working
on the book by ourselves since then there's my own autobiography there is the
movie novelization but whether whether that will come to pass or not nobody
knows because you have to please uh several different people with quite
different ideas as to what they want and uh that's about that's about it for
what we are presently working on i have a book of another book of light verse
called heroes and hobgoblins i'm just sending off the corrected page proofs on
that and I have one one science fiction novel and one fantasy novel planned and
I believe that the agent has got me a contract for the fantasy novel so as soon
as I get the other things out of the way I shall have to work on that alright I
really can't I mean I could think of some more things to ask but probably that's
going to be enough we've taken enough of your time I'm going to give you back to
David in just a second he's This is going to give you the details of how we're
going to get this tape to you.